                                               Goal Representations for Instruction Following:
                                              A Semi-Supervised Language Interface to Control
                                                 Vivek Myers,∗ Andre He,∗ Kuan Fang, Homer Walke, Philippe Hansen-Estruch,
                                               Ching-An Cheng,† Mihai Jalobeanu,† Andrey Kolobov,† Anca Dragan, Sergey Levine
                                                              University of California Berkeley, † Microsoft Research
                                             {vmyers,andre.he,kuanfang,homer walke,hansenpmeche}@berkeley.edu
                                                       {ChingAn.Cheng,mihaijal,akolobov}@microsoft.com
                                                                    {anca,svlevine}@berkeley.edu
arXiv:2307.00117v2 [cs.RO] 18 Aug 2023




                                                   Abstract: Our goal is for robots to follow natural language instructions like “put
                                                   the towel next to the microwave.” But getting large amounts of labeled data, i.e.
                                                   data that contains demonstrations of tasks labeled with the language instruction,
                                                   is prohibitive. In contrast, obtaining policies that respond to image goals is much
                                                   easier, because any autonomous trial or demonstration can be labeled in hindsight
                                                   with its final state as the goal. In this work, we contribute a method that taps
                                                   into joint image- and goal- conditioned policies with language using only a small
                                                   amount of language data. Prior work has made progress on this using vision-
                                                   language models or by jointly training language-goal-conditioned policies, but so
                                                   far neither method has scaled effectively to real-world robot tasks without sig-
                                                   nificant human annotation. Our method achieves robust performance in the real
                                                   world by learning an embedding from the labeled data that aligns language not to
                                                   the goal image, but rather to the desired change between the start and goal images
                                                   that the instruction corresponds to. We then train a policy on this embedding: the
                                                   policy benefits from all the unlabeled data, but the aligned embedding provides an
                                                   interface for language to steer the policy. We show instruction following across a
                                                   variety of manipulation tasks in different scenes, with generalization to language
                                                   instructions outside of the labeled data. Videos and code for our approach can be
                                                   found on our website: https://rail-berkeley.github.io/grif/.

                                                   Keywords: Instruction Following, Representation Learning, Manipulation

                                         1    Introduction
                                         Natural language has the potential to be an easy-to-use and powerful form of task specification
                                         in robotics. To follow language instructions, a robot must understand human intent, ground its
                                         understanding in the state and action spaces, and solve the task by interacting with the environment.
                                         Training robots to do this is challenging, especially given that language-annotated data is limited.
                                         Existing deep learning approaches require large amounts of expensive human language-annotated
                                         demonstrations and are brittle on instructions outside the training data.
                                         Visual goals (i.e., goal images), though less intuitive for humans, provide complementary bene-
                                         fits for task representation in policy learning. Goals benefit from being easy to ground since, as
                                         images, they can be directly compared with other states. More importantly, goal tasks provide addi-
                                         tional supervision and enable learning from unstructured data through hindsight relabeling [1, 2, 3].
                                         However, compared to language instructions, specifying visual goals is less practical for real-world
                                         applications, where users likely prefer to tell the robot what they want rather than having to show it.
                                         Exposing an instruction-following interface for goal-conditioned policies could combine the
                                         strengths of both goal- and language- task specification to enable generalist robots that can be easily
                                             * Equal contribution
                                                                     instruction       initial state   goal

                                                                  “put the pepper in
                            self-supervised:                           the pan”
                             a LOT of data

       initial state               π
                              z           a                        “move the pan to
                                                                      the front”
                                                                                                              diverse
                                                                                                              tasks in
                                                                                                               same
                                                                                                               scene

                                                                  “put the pepper on
          goal                                                        the towel”


    language-supervised:
        a BIT of data                                             “move the towel to
                                                                      the left”


                       “put the pan on                                                                        diverse
                                                                                                              scenes
                         the towel”                                “put the spoon on
                                                                      the towel”
                         instruction


                                       Our Approach (GRIF)                Example Rollouts
Figure 1: Left: Our approach learns representations of instructions that are aligned to transitions
from the initial state to the goal. When commanded with instructions, the policy π computes the
task representation z from the instruction and predicts the action a to solve the task. Our approach
is trained with a small number of labeled demonstrations and large-scale unlabeled demonstrations.
Right: Our approach can solve diverse tasks and generalize to vast environment variations.

commanded. While goal-conditioned policy learning can help digest unstructured data, non-robot
vision-language data sources make it possible to connect language and visual goals for generaliza-
tion to diverse instructions in the real world.
To this end, we propose Goal Representations for Instruction Following (GRIF), an approach that
jointly trains a language- and a goal- conditioned policy with aligned task representations. We
term task representations aligned because our objective encourages learning similar representations
for language instructions and state transitions that correspond to the same semantic task. GRIF
learns this representation structure explicitly through a contrastive task alignment term. Since task
representations across language and image goal modalities have similar semantics, this approach
allows us to use robot data collected without annotations to improve performance by the agent on
image goal tasks when viewed as a goal-conditioned policy, and thus indirectly improve language-
conditioned performance in a semi-supervised manner. An overview of GRIF is shown in Figure 1.
We present an approach for learning a language interface for visuomotor control without extensive
language labels. With this method, we demonstrate that the semantic knowledge from a pre-trained
vision-language model (CLIP [4]) can be used to improved task representations and manipulation
even though such models perform poorly at task understanding out-of-the-box. Our experiments
show that aligning task representations to scene changes enables improved performance at grounding
and following language instructions within diverse real-world scenes.


2     Related Work

Robotic control with language interfaces. Early works in language-conditioned robotic control
use hand-designed parse trees or probabilistic graphical models to convert instructions into symbolic
states to configure the downstream planners and controllers [5, 6, 7, 8]. To generalize beyond limited
human specifications, a growing number of works have trained conditional policies end-to-end to
follow natural language instructions [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. Combining recent
advances large language models (LLMs) [21] with learned language-conditioned policies as a low-
level API has have paved the way for broad downstream applications with improved planning and
generalization [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. However, most of these methods need high-capacity policy
networks with massive, costly labeled demonstration data. As a result, the learned policies often
generalize poorly to unseen scenarios or can only handle limited instructions in real-world scenes.
Unlike past work, we learn low-level language-conditioned control from less annotated data.


                                                             2
Vision-language pre-training. Vision-language models (VLMs) enable textual descriptions to be
associated with visual scenes [4, 28]. Through contrastive learning over internet-scale data, recent
large-scale VLMs such as CLIP [4] have achieved unprecedented zero-shot and few-shot general-
ization capabilities, with a wide range of applications.
Despite these advances, applying pre-trained VLMs to robotic control is not straightforward since
control requires grounding instructions in motions instead of static images. Through training from
scratch or fine-tuning on human trajectories [29, 30], recent approaches learn representations for
visuomotor control [31, 32]. These works use language labels to to learn visual representations for
control without directly using language as an interface to the policy. In CLIPort, Shridhar et al. [33]
use pre-trained CLIP [4] to enable sample-efficient policy learning. Their approach selects actions
from high-level skills through imitation, assuming access to predefined pick-and-place motion prim-
itives with known camera parameters. In contrast, our approach learns to align the representation
of the instruction and the representation of the transition from the initial state to the goal on labeled
robot data, and uses these representations for control without assumptions about the observation and
action spaces. Other approaches use VLMs to recover reward signals for reinforcement learning
[34, 35, 36, 37, 3]. In contrast, our approach directly trains language-conditioned policy through
imitation learning without the need for online interactions with the environment.
Learning language-conditioned tasks by reaching goals. Alternatively, language-conditioned
policies can be constructed or learned through goal-conditioned policies [38, 39]. Lynch and Ser-
manet [40] propose an approach that facilitates language-conditioned imitation learning by sharing
the policy network and aligning the representations of the two conditional tasks. Based on the same
motivation, we propose an alternative approach which explicitly extends the alignment of VLMs to
specify tasks as changes in the scene. By tuning a contrastive alignment objective, our method is able
to exploit the knowledge of VLMs [4] pre-trained on broad data. This explicit alignment improves
upon past approaching to connecting images and language [41, 42] by explicitly aligning tasks in-
stead merely jointly training on conditional tasks. In Sec. 5, we show our approach significantly
improves the performance of the learned policy and enhances generalization to new instructions.

3   Problem Setup

Our objective is to train robots to solve tasks specified by natural language from interactions with
the environment. This problem can be formulated as a conditional Markov decision process (MDP)
denoted by the tuple (S, A, ρ, P, W, γ), with state space S, action space A, initial state probability
ρ, transition probability P , an instruction space W, and discount γ. Given the instruction ℓ ∈ W,
the robot takes action at ∈ A given the state st at each time step t to achieve success.
To solve such tasks, we train a language-conditioned policy π(a|s, ℓ) on a combination of human
demonstrations and autonomously collected trajectories. Since high-quality natural language an-
notations are expensive and time-consuming to obtain, we assume that only a small portion of the
trajectories are labeled with the corresponding instructions. The robot has access to a combination
of two datasets—a small-scale labeled dataset DL with annotated instructions and a large-scale un-
labeled dataset DU consists of more diverse play data collected in an open-ended manner. Our goal
is to train π(a|s, ℓ) while taking advantage of both the labeled and unlabeled datasets. We formulate
π(a|s, ℓ) as a stochastic policy that predicts the Gaussian distribution N (µa , Σa ).

4   Goal Representations for Instruction Following

We propose Goal Representations for Instruction Following (GRIF) to interface visuomotor policies
with natural language instructions in a semi-supervised fashion (Figure. 2). Although the language-
conditioned policy cannot be directly trained on the unlabeled dataset DU , we can facilitate the
training through goal-conditioned tasks. Solving both types of tasks requires the policy to under-
stand the human intent, ground it in the current observation, and predict necessary actions. Although
the first steps involve understanding task specifications of different modalities (goal images and lan-


                                                   3
guage), the remaining steps of such processes can be shared between the two settings. To this end, we
decouple the language-conditioned policy π(a|s, ℓ) into a policy network πθ (a|s, z) and a language-
conditioned task encoder fφ (ℓ), where z = fφ (ℓ) is the representation of the task specified by the
instruction ℓ. To solve the goal-conditioned task, we also introduce a goal-conditioned task encoder
hψ . The policy network πθ is shared between the language-conditioned and goal-conditioned tasks.
This approach relies on the alignment of task representations. While most existing VLMs align
text with static images, we argue that the representation of the goal-conditioned tasks should be
computed from the state-goal pair (s0 , g). This is because the instruction often focuses on the
changing factors from the initial state to the goal rather than directly describing the entire goal image,
e.g., “move the metal pan to the left”. Therefore, the representations of goal-conditioned tasks are
computed as z = hψ (s0 , g) and we aim to train the encoders such that for (s0 , g, ℓ) sampled from the
same trajectory, the distance between fφ (ℓ) and hψ (s0 , g) should be close and far apart otherwise.
We illustrate our high-level approach in Figure 2.

4.1   Explicit Alignment through Contrastive Learning

We propose explicitly aligning the representations of goal-conditioned and language-conditioned
tasks through contrastive learning [41]. Compared to implicitly aligning the task presentations
through joint training of the two conditional policies, contrastive alignment requires that all rele-
vant information for selecting actions be included in the shared task representation. This improves
the transfer between the action prediction tasks for both goal and language modalities by preventing
the policy from relying on features only present in one task modality in selecting actions. Using an
InfoNCE objective [42], we train the two encoders fφ and hψ to represent instructions ℓ and tran-
sitions (s0 , g) according to their task semantics. More concretely, for (s0 , g) and ℓ that correspond
to the same task, we would like their embeddings zℓ = fφ (ℓ) and zg = hψ (s0 , g) to be close in the
latent space, while zℓ and zg corresponding to different tasks to be far apart.
To compute the InfoNCE objective, we define C(s, g, ℓ) = cos(f (ℓ), h(s, g)) with the cosine sim-
ilarity cos(·, ·). We sample positive data s+ , g + , ℓ+ ∼ DL by selecting the start state, end state,
and language annotation of a random trajectory. We sample negative examples s− , g − ∼ DL by
selecting the start state and end state of a random trajectory, and sample ℓ− ∼ DL by selecting the
language annotation of another random trajectory. For each positive tuple, we sample k negative
examples and denote them as {s−        − k           − k
                                  i , gi }i=1 and {ℓi }j=1 . Then we can define the InfoNCE Ltask :

                                                    exp(C(s+ , g + , ℓ+ )/τ )
             Llang→goal = − log                              Pk
                                  exp(C(s+ , g + , ℓ+ )/τ ) + i=1 exp C(s−         − +
                                                                                             
                                                                              i , gi , ℓ )/τ
                                                    exp(C(s+ , g + , ℓ+ )/τ )
             Lgoal→lang = − log                              Pk
                                  exp(C(s+ , g + , ℓ+ )/τ ) + j=1 exp C(s+ , g + , ℓ−
                                                                                          
                                                                                    j )/τ
                  Ltask = Llang→goal + Lgoal→lang                                                     (1)
where τ is a temperature hyperparameter. Llang→goal and Lgoal→lang represent the log classification
accuracy of our alignment in predicting goals from language and language from goals respectively.

4.2   Weight Initialization with Vision-Language Models

To handle tasks involving objects and instructions beyond those contained in the limited labeled
dataset, we wish to incorporate prior knowledge from broader sources into the encoders fφ and hψ .
For this purpose, we investigate practical ways to incorporate Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [4]
pre-trained on massive paired images and texts into our encoders. Pre-trained VLMs demonstrate ef-
fective zero-shot and few-shot generalization capability for vision-language tasks [4, 43]. However,
they are originally designed for aligning a single static image with its caption without the ability to
understand the changes in the environment that language tasks correspond to, and perform poorly
on compositional generalization [44, 45], which is key to modeling changes in scene state. We wish
to encode the change between images while still exploiting prior knowledge in pre-trained VLMs.


                                                    4
               Learn Task Representations                                   Learn Policy

                                   fφ(ℓ)
       “place the
      spoon on the
                                                                   “place the
                                                                  spoon on the
                                                                                        DL
         towel”                                                      towel”


                              f1      f2      f3      f4      …                         DU
          DL
                       h1   h1 ⋅ f1 h1 ⋅ f2 h1 ⋅ f3 h1 ⋅ f4

                       h2   h2 ⋅ f1 h2 ⋅ f2 h2 ⋅ f3 h2 ⋅ f4       fφ(ℓ)             z        hψ (s0, g)


                       h3   h3 ⋅ f1 h3 ⋅ f2 h3 ⋅ f3 h3 ⋅ f4   ⋱                                           s
        hψ (s0, g)
                       h4   h4 ⋅ f1 h4 ⋅ f2 h4 ⋅ f3 h4 ⋅ f4
                                                                                 πθ(s, z)                     a
                      ⋮              Contrastive Alignment Loss                              BC Loss


Figure 2: Left: We explicitly align representations between goal-conditioned and language-
conditioned tasks on the labeled dataset DL through contrastive learning. Right: Given the pre-
trained task representations, we train a policy on both labeled and unlabeled datasets.

To address this issue, we devise a mechanism to accommodate and fine-tune the CLIP [4] model
for aligning the transition (s0 , g) with the instruction ℓ. Specifically, we duplicate and halve the
weights of the first layer of the CLIP architecture so it can operate on pairs of stacked images rather
than single images. Details on how we modify the pre-trained CLIP to accommodate encoding
changes are presented in Appendix C.2. In practice, we find this mechanism significantly improves
the generalization capability of the learned policy πθ (a|s, g).

4.3    Policy Learning with Aligned Representations

We train the policy jointly on the two datasets DL and DU with the aligned task representations.
By sampling (ℓ, st , at ) from DL , we train the policy network πθ (a|z) to solve language-conditioned
tasks with z = fφ (ℓ). And by sampling (s0 , g, st , at ) from DL ∪ DU , πθ is trained to reach goals
with z = hψ (s0 , g). We train with behavioral cloning to maximize the likelihood of the actions at .
We investigate two ways to train the policy given the encoders fφ and hψ . The straightforward
way is to jointly train the policy network πϕ and the two encoders end-to-end. This process adapts
the encoders with the policy network to encourage them to incorporate information that facilitates
downstream robotic control, but can also backfire if the policy learns to rely on visual-only features
that are absent in the language conditioned setting. Alternatively, we can freeze the pre-trained
weights of the two encoders and only train the shared policy network πϕ on the two datasets. In
Section 5, we evaluate and discuss the performances of both options.

5     Experiments

Our work started with the premise of tapping into large, goal-conditioned datasets. To build a lan-
guage interface for goal-conditioned policy learning, we proposed to learn explicitly aligned task
representations, and to align instructions to state changes rather than static goals. Lastly, we advo-
cated for the use of pre-trained VLMs to incorporate larger sources of vision-language knowledge.
Therefore, we aim to test the following hypotheses in our experiments:

H1: Unlabeled trajectories will benefit the language-conditioned policy on new instructions.
H2: Explicitly aligning task representations improves upon the implicit alignment from LangLfP-
       style joint training [40].
H3: The prior knowledge in pre-trained VLMs can improve learned task representations.


                                                              5
                                                                   GRIF           LLfP                                   BC-Z
      Scene A:                                                      Scene B:                                                    Scene C:
                 "put the yellow bell pepper on the cloth"
                 "move the pan to the front"
                                                                                                                                           "move the towel to the left"
                 "put the pan on the towel"                                    "put the mushroom in the metal pot "
                                                                                                                                           "move the towel to the front"
                 "move the bell pepper to the left of the table"               "put the spoon on the towel"
                                                                                                                                           "move the towel next to the cans"
                 "put the bell pepper in the pan"                              "place the metal pot on top of the blue
                                                                                                                                           "move the towel next to the
                 "put the knife on the purple cloth"                           towel"
                                                                                                                                           microwave"
                 "place the knife in front of the microwave"
                 "move the pan in front of the cloth"




                                                                           Success Rate

Figure 3: Comparison of success rates ±SE between the top three methods across all trials within
the three scenes. Two other baselines LCBC and R3M (not shown) achieved 0.0 success in all
evaluation tasks although they do succeed on tasks that are heavily covered in the training data.
Statistical significance is starred. The initial observation and instructions of each scene are shown.

H4: Aligning transitions with language enable better use of VLMs compared to conventional
       image-language contrastive methods [37, 46].

Our experiments are conducted in an table-top manipulation domain. For training, we use a labeled
dataset DL containing 7k trajectories and an unlabeled DU containing 47k trajectories. Our approach
learns to imitate the 6 DOF continuous gripper control actions in the data at 5Hz. The evaluation
scenes and unseen instructions are shown in Figure 3. Additional details about the environment, the
dataset, and the breakdown of results are described in Appendices B and E.

5.1    Comparative Results

We compare the proposed GRIF with four baseline methods on a set of 15 unseen instructions
from all 3 scenes and report the aggregated results in Figure 3, with GRIF attaining the best per-
formance across all scenes. The per-task success rates can be found in Appendix E. LCBC [9]
uses a behavioral cloning objective to train a policy conditioned on language from DL , similar to
prior methods on instruction-conditioned imitation learning. LLfP [40] jointly trains a goal con-
ditioned and language conditioned policy on partially labeled data, but does not learn aligned task
representations. R3M [32] provides pre-trained state representations for robot manipulation that are
predictive of language-conditioned rewards. We use this approach as a baseline by jointly training
goal- and language-conditioned policies while using R3M state encodings as goal representations
(i.e., hψ (s0 , g) = R3M(g)). BC-Z [10] jointly trains language- and video-conditioned policies and
uses an additional cosine similarity term to align video and language embeddings. This approach
does not transfer directly into our goal-conditioned setting, but we create a baseline that adapts it
to our setting by jointly training goal- and language-conditioned policies while aligning task repre-
sentations with a cosine distance loss. The architecture choices are standardized across all methods
for fair comparisons. Unless stated otherwise, all baselines use a ResNet-18 as the goal encoder
hψ (s0 , g). In our preliminary experiments, this architecture was found to give good performance
when used to train goal-conditioned policies in our setting. For the language encoder fφ (ℓ), all
baselines use a pre-trained and frozen MUSE model [47], as in previous work [40, 10].
We find that language-conditioned policies must make use of unlabeled trajectories to achieve non-
zero success rates when generalizing to new language instructions in support of H1. LCBC does
not use unlabeled data and fails to complete any tasks. R3M jointly trains goal- and language-
conditioned policies, but it also fails all tasks. This is likely due to its goal encodings being frozen
and unable to be implicitly aligned to language during joint training. Methods that use implicit or
explicit alignment (GRIF, LLfP, BC-Z), are able to exploit unlabeled goal data to follow instruc-
tions to varying degrees of success. These comparisons suggest that the combined effect of using
pre-trained CLIP to align transitions with language significantly improves language-conditioned ca-
pabilities. Our model significantly outperformed all baselines on 8 out of 15 tasks, achieving high


                                                                                6
success rates on several tasks where the baselines almost completely fail (“place the knife in front
of the microwave”, “move the pan in front of the cloth”, “put the knife on the purple cloth”), while
achieving similar performance to the next-best baseline on the remaining tasks. Where baselines
failed, we often observed grounding failures. The robot reached for incorrect objects, placed them
in incorrect locations, or was easily distracted by nearby objects into performing a different task.


5.2   Ablation Study

We run a series of ablations to analyze the performance of GRIF and test the hypotheses. No Align
ablates the effect of explicit alignment by removing the contrastive objective. We also unfreeze
the task encoders so that they are implicitly aligned via joint training of the language- and goal-
conditioned policies. No CLIP ablates the effect of using pre-trained CLIP by replacing the image
and text encoders with a ResNet-18 and pre-trained MUSE language encoder. In No Start, the
image task representaions only depend on goals as hψ (g), instead of depending on transitions as
hψ (s0 , g). This is the conventional way to connect goals and language with CLIP that is often used
in previous work [46, 37]. For GRIF (Labeled), we exclude DU to study whether using unlabeled
data is important for performance. GRIF (Joint) trains the task alignment and policy losses jointly,
taking gradients through the image encoder and freezing the language encoder. This is the end-to-
end approach discussed in Section 4.3. We refer to our full approach without joint training as GRIF
(Frozen) in the remainder of this section.
As shown in Figure 4, explicit
alignment, pre-trained CLIP, and                             Ablation Results (Scene A)
transition-based task representations
all play critical roles in achieving GRIF (Frozen)
                                            GRIF (Joint)
high success rates. Notably, the con-
                                         GRIF (Labeled)
ventional approach of aligning static
                                               No Start
goals and instructions with CLIP (No          No Align
Start) fails almost completely in our          No CLIP
setting. This is in support of H4
and confirms that transitions, and not
                                                                    Success Rate
goal images, should be aligned to lan-
guage tasks. In GRIF (Labeled), Figure 4: Success rates of ablations with one standard error.
dropping DU significantly decreases
success rates, further supporting H1. We observe that this is primarily due to a deterioration of
manipulation skills rather than grounding, which is expected as grounding is mostly learned via ex-
plicit alignment on DL . Regarding H2 and H3, we observe that removing either alignment or CLIP
results in a large drop in performance. We also observed that No Align outperforms its counterpart
LLfP by using the pre-trained CLIP model (after the modification in Sec. 4.2) in the task encoder.
We hypothesize that this is because CLIP has already been explicitly aligned during pre-training,
and some of its knowledge is retained during joint training with the policy even without GRIF’s task
alignment loss. Lastly, deciding to freeze the task encoders during policy training does not appear to
significantly affect our model’s performance. This is likely because the contrastive learning phase
already learns representations that can represent the semantic task, so there is less to gain from
further implicit alignment during joint training.


5.3   Analysis on the Learned Task Representations

For additional analysis, we evaluate our model’s task grounding capabilities independently of the
manipulation policy and compare it with ablations. Specifically, we evaluate how well our model
can connect new language instructions to correct goals in a scene. This is important to downstream
policy success: if the model is able to project the language to a representation fφ (l) that is close to
that of the correct (but unprovided) goal hψ (s0 , g), then the policy will likely be able to execute the
task since it has been trained on a large amount of goal-conditioned data.


                                                   7
                 Top-5 Text To Image Retrieval Accuracy                                                   s0
                                                              “Move the cloth to the
                                                               empty table corner”
GRIF (Frozen)                                                                                             g
  GRIF (Joint)
     No Start
     No Align                                                                                             s0
     No CLIP                                                   “Place the spoon on
                                                                top of the towel”
                                                                                                          g

                         Retrieval Accuracy (%)                    Instruction         Retrieved Images



Figure 5: Left: Comparison of the top-5 text to image retrieval accuracy of representations learned
by different ablations. Right: Examples of retrieved image pairs given instructions.

Our task representations are trained with a contrastive objective, offering a convenient way to com-
pute alignment between language and goals. On an dataset of labeled held-out trajectories, we
compute the similarities between all pairs of visual task representations hψ (s0 , g) and language
task representations fφ (ℓ). For each language instruction, we retrieve the top k most similar (s0 , g)
transitions and compute the accuracy for the correct transition being retrieved. We compute this
metric in fixed batches of 256 examples and average over the validation set to report a text-to-image
retrieval accuracy. We compute this metric for representations from each of our ablations and report
the results in Figure 5 to analyze why GRIF outperforms other approaches in our main experiments.
Our task representations show significantly better generalization compared to using a conventional
image-language alignment (No Start), despite it being CLIP’s original pre-training objective. The
alignment accuracy is also more than 50% higher than when using non-VLM encoders (No CLIP),
suggesting potentially large gains in grounding capability through using VLMs.
We also study the effect of the number of language annotations on our model’s grounding capability.
Even at less than half the number of language annotations (3k), GRIF outperforms all the ablations
in Figure 5, achieving a retrieval accuracy of 73%. Detailed results for this ablation are presented in
Appendix F, showing our approach is robust to lower amounts of language supervision.

6     Discussion, Limitations, and Future Work

Our approach to aligning image goals and language instructions enables a robot to utilize large
amounts of unlabeled trajectory data to learn goal-conditioned policies, while providing a “language
interface” to these policies via aligned language-goal representations. In contrast to prior language-
image alignment methods, our representations align changes in state to language, which we show
leads to significantly better performance than more commonly used CLIP-style image-language
alignment objectives. Our experiments demonstrate that our approach can effectively leverage unla-
beled robotic trajectories, with large improvements in performance over baselines and methods that
only use the language-annotated data.
Limitations and future work. Our method has a number of limitations that could be addressed in
future. For instance, our method is not well-suited for tasks where instructions say more about how
to do the task rather than what to do (e.g., “pour the water slowly”)—such qualitative instructions
might require other types of alignment losses that more effectively consider the intermediate steps
of task execution. Our approach also assumes that all language grounding comes from the portion of
our dataset that is fully annotated or a pre-trained VLM. An exciting direction for future work would
be to extend our alignment loss to utilize non-robot vision-language data, such as videos, to learn rich
semantics from Internet-scale data. Such an approach could then use this data to improve grounding
on language not in the robot dataset and enable broadly generalizable and powerful robotic policies
that can follow user instructions.



                                                          8
Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge the funding provided by AFOSR FA9550-22-1-0273, ONR N00014-
20-1-2383, NSF IIS-2150826, and ONR YIP N00014-20-1-2736.

References
 [1] M. Andrychowicz, F. Wolski, A. Ray, J. Schneider, R. Fong, P. Welinder, B. McGrew, J. Tobin,
     O. Pieter Abbeel, and W. Zaremba. Hindsight Experience Replay. In Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.

 [2] D. Ghosh, A. Gupta, A. Reddy, J. Fu, C. Devin, B. Eysenbach, and S. Levine. Learning to
     Reach Goals via Iterated Supervised Learning, Oct. 2020.

 [3] S. Nair, E. Mitchell, K. Chen, B. Ichter, S. Savarese, and C. Finn. Learning Language-
     Conditioned Robot Behavior from Offline Data and Crowd-Sourced Annotation. In Proceed-
     ings of the 5th Conference on Robot Learning, pages 1303–1315. PMLR, Jan. 2022.

 [4] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell,
     P. Mishkin, J. Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervi-
     sion, Feb. 2021.

 [5] T. Winograd. Procedures as a representation for data in a computer program for understanding
     natural language. 1971.

 [6] M. Skubic, D. Perzanowski, S. Blisard, A. C. Schultz, W. Adams, M. D. Bugajska, and D. P.
     Brock. Spatial language for human-robot dialogs. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
     Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), 34:154–167, 2004.

 [7] K. yuh Hsiao, S. Tellex, S. Vosoughi, R. Kubat, and D. K. Roy. Object schemas for grounding
     language in a responsive robot. Connection Science, 20:253 – 276, 2008.

 [8] S. Tellex, T. Kollar, S. Dickerson, M. R. Walter, A. G. Banerjee, S. J. Teller, and N. Roy.
     Understanding natural language commands for robotic navigation and mobile manipulation.
     Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2011.

 [9] S. Stepputtis, J. Campbell, M. Phielipp, S. Lee, C. Baral, and H. B. Amor. Language-
     conditioned imitation learning for robot manipulation tasks. ArXiv, abs/2010.12083, 2020.

[10] E. Jang, A. Irpan, M. Khansari, D. Kappler, F. Ebert, C. Lynch, S. Levine, and C. Finn. BC-Z:
     Zero-Shot Task Generalization with Robotic Imitation Learning. Conference on Robot Learn-
     ing, page 12, 2021. doi:164:991-1002.

[11] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, J. Dabis, C. Finn, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Haus-
     man, A. Herzog, J. Hsu, et al. RT-1: ROBOTICS TRANSFORMER FOR REAL-WORLD
     CONTROL AT SCALE, Dec. 2022.

[12] PaLM-E: An Embodied Multimodal Language Model.

[13] Y. Jiang, A. Gupta, Z. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Dou, Y. Chen, L. Fei-Fei, A. Anandkumar, Y. Zhu,
     and L. Fan. VIMA: General Robot Manipulation with Multimodal Prompts, Oct. 2022.

[14] K. Lin, C. Agia, T. Migimatsu, M. Pavone, and J. Bohg. Text2motion: From natural language
     instructions to feasible plans. ArXiv, abs/2303.12153, 2023.

[15] W. Liu, C. Paxton, T. Hermans, and D. Fox. Structformer: Learning spatial structure for
     language-guided semantic rearrangement of novel objects. 2022 International Conference on
     Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 6322–6329, 2021.


                                                 9
[16] Y. Jiang, A. Gupta, Z. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Dou, Y. Chen, L. Fei-Fei, A. Anandkumar,
     Y. Zhu, and L. J. Fan. Vima: General robot manipulation with multimodal prompts. ArXiv,
     abs/2210.03094, 2022.

[17] M. Shridhar, L. Manuelli, and D. Fox. Perceiver-actor: A multi-task transformer for robotic
     manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.

[18] H. Mei, M. Bansal, and M. R. Walter. Listen, Attend, and Walk: Neural Mapping of Naviga-
     tional Instructions to Action Sequences, Dec. 2015.

[19] P. Anderson, Q. Wu, D. Teney, J. Bruce, M. Johnson, N. Sünderhauf, I. Reid, S. Gould, and
     A. van den Hengel. Vision-and-Language Navigation: Interpreting Visually-Grounded Navi-
     gation Instructions in Real Environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
     Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3674–3683, 2018.

[20] D. Fried, R. Hu, V. Cirik, A. Rohrbach, J. Andreas, L.-P. Morency, T. Berg-Kirkpatrick,
     K. Saenko, D. Klein, and T. Darrell. Speaker-Follower Models for Vision-and-Language Navi-
     gation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates,
     Inc., 2018.

[21] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan,
     P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, et al. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners, 2020.

[22] M. Ahn, A. Brohan, N. Brown, Y. Chebotar, O. Cortes, B. David, C. Finn, C. Fu, K. Gopalakr-
     ishnan, K. Hausman, et al. Do As I Can, Not As I Say: Grounding Language in Robotic
     Affordances, Aug. 2022.

[23] M. Attarian, A. Gupta, Z. Zhou, W. Yu, I. Gilitschenski, and A. Garg. See, Plan, Predict:
     Language-guided Cognitive Planning with Video Prediction, Oct. 2022.

[24] M. Shridhar, J. Thomason, D. Gordon, Y. Bisk, W. Han, R. Mottaghi, L. Zettlemoyer, and
     D. Fox. ALFRED: A Benchmark for Interpreting Grounded Instructions for Everyday Tasks.
     In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
     pages 10740–10749, 2020.

[25] J. Wu, R. Antonova, A. Kan, M. Lepert, A. Zeng, S. Song, J. Bohg, S. Rusinkiewicz, and
     T. A. Funkhouser. Tidybot: Personalized robot assistance with large language models. ArXiv,
     abs/2305.05658, 2023.

[26] I. Singh, V. Blukis, A. Mousavian, A. Goyal, D. Xu, J. Tremblay, D. Fox, J. Thomason, and
     A. Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task plans using large language models. ArXiv,
     abs/2209.11302, 2022.

[27] O. Mees, L. Hermann, E. Rosete-Beas, and W. Burgard. CALVIN: A Benchmark for
     Language-Conditioned Policy Learning for Long-Horizon Robot Manipulation Tasks. IEEE
     Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(3):7327–7334, July 2022. ISSN 2377-3766. doi:
     10.1109/LRA.2022.3180108.

[28] J. Yu, Z. Wang, V. Vasudevan, L. Yeung, M. Seyedhosseini, and Y. Wu. CoCa: Contrastive
     Captioners are Image-Text Foundation Models, June 2022.

[29] K. Grauman, A. Westbury, E. Byrne, Z. Chavis, A. Furnari, R. Girdhar, J. Hamburger, H. Jiang,
     M. Liu, X. Liu, et al. Ego4D: Around the World in 3,000 Hours of Egocentric Video, Mar.
     2022.

[30] R. Goyal, S. E. Kahou, V. Michalski, J. Materzyńska, S. Westphal, H. Kim, V. Haenel, I. Fru-
     end, P. Yianilos, M. Mueller-Freitag, et al. The ”something something” video database for
     learning and evaluating visual common sense, June 2017.


                                               10
[31] I. Radosavovic, T. Xiao, S. James, P. Abbeel, J. Malik, and T. Darrell. Real-world robot
     learning with masked visual pre-training. ArXiv, abs/2210.03109, 2022.
[32] S. Nair, A. Rajeswaran, V. Kumar, C. Finn, and A. Gupta. R3M: A Universal Visual Repre-
     sentation for Robot Manipulation, Nov. 2022.

[33] M. Shridhar, L. Manuelli, and D. Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic manipu-
     lation. ArXiv, abs/2109.12098, 2021.
[34] L. Fan, G. Wang, Y. Jiang, A. Mandlekar, Y. Yang, H. Zhu, A. Tang, D.-A. Huang, Y. Zhu,
     and A. Anandkumar. MineDojo: Building Open-Ended Embodied Agents with Internet-Scale
     Knowledge, June 2022.

[35] L. Shao, T. Migimatsu, Q. Zhang, K. Yang, and J. Bohg. Concept2Robot: Learning ma-
     nipulation concepts from instructions and human demonstrations. The International Jour-
     nal of Robotics Research, 40(12-14):1419–1434, Dec. 2021. ISSN 0278-3649. doi:10.1177/
     02783649211046285.
[36] Y. J. Ma, V. Kumar, A. Zhang, O. Bastani, and D. Jayaraman. LIV: Language-Image Repre-
     sentations and Rewards for Robotic Control. May 2023.
[37] Y. Cui, S. Niekum, A. Gupta, V. Kumar, and A. Rajeswaran. Can Foundation Models Perform
     Zero-Shot Task Specification For Robot Manipulation?, Apr. 2022.
[38] L. P. Kaelbling. Learning to Achieve Goals. In IJCAI, 1993.

[39] T. Schaul, D. Horgan, K. Gregor, and D. Silver. Universal Value Function Approximators. In
     International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015.
[40] C. Lynch and P. Sermanet. Language Conditioned Imitation Learning over Unstructured Data,
     July 2021.

[41] Z. Ma and M. Collins. Noise Contrastive Estimation and Negative Sampling for Conditional
     Models: Consistency and Statistical Efficiency, Sept. 2018.
[42] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals. Representation Learning with Contrastive Predictive
     Coding, Jan. 2019.
[43] H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, and Y. J. Lee. Visual Instruction Tuning, Apr. 2023.

[44] K. Jiang, X. He, R. Xu, and X. E. Wang. ComCLIP: Training-Free Compositional Image and
     Text Matching, Nov. 2022.
[45] M. Lewis, N. V. Nayak, P. Yu, Q. Yu, J. Merullo, S. H. Bach, and E. Pavlick. Does CLIP Bind
     Concepts? Probing Compositionality in Large Image Models, Mar. 2023.

[46] S. Y. Gadre, M. Wortsman, G. Ilharco, L. Schmidt, and S. Song. CoWs on Pasture: Baselines
     and Benchmarks for Language-Driven Zero-Shot Object Navigation, Dec. 2022.
[47] Y. Yang, D. Cer, A. Ahmad, M. Guo, J. Law, N. Constant, G. H. Abrego, S. Yuan, C. Tar, Y.-H.
     Sung, et al. Multilingual Universal Sentence Encoder for Semantic Retrieval, July 2019.




                                                11
Appendix

A     Website
Videos and code for our approach can be found at https://rail-berkeley.github.io/
grif/.

B     Environment Details
We provide more details on the real-world environment in this section.

B.1   Robot

We use a 6DOF WidowX 250 robot with a 1DOF parallel-jaw gripper. We install the robot on a
tabletop where it can reach and manipulate objects within an environment set up in front of it. The
robot receives inputs from a Logitech C920 RGB camera installed in an over-the-shoulder view. The
images are passed into the policy at a 128 x 128, and the control frequency is 5Hz. Teleoperation
data is collected with a Meta Quest 2 VR headset that controls the robot.

B.2   Dataset Details

The dataset consists of trajectories collected from 24 different environments, which includes
kitchen-, sink-, and tabletop-themed manipulation environments. The dataset features around 100
objects, including containers, utensils, toy food items, towels, and other kitchen-themed objects. It
includes demonstrations of 13 high-level skills (pick and place, sweep, etc.) applied to different
objects. Out of the 54k total trajectories, 7k are annotated with language instructions. Around 44k
of the trajectories are expert demonstrations and around 10k are collected by a scripted policy.

C     Method Details
C.1   Policy Network

Our policy network πθ (a|s, z) uses a ResNet-34 architecture. To condition on the task embedding
z, it is first passed through 2 fully connected layers. Then, the policy network is conditioned on the
embedding using FiLM layers, which are applied at the end of every block throughout the ResNet.
The image encoding is then passed into a fully connected network to predict the action distribution.
The policy network predicts the action mean, and we use a fixed standard deviation.

C.2   CLIP Model Surgery

Instead of separately encoding s0 and g inside fφ , we perform a “surgery” to the CLIP model to
enable it to take (s0 , g) as inputs while keeping most of its pre-trained network weights as intact as
possible. Specifically, we clone the weight matrix Win of the first layer in the pre-trained CLIP and
concatenate them along the channel dimension to be [Win ; Win ], creating a model that can accept
the stacked [s0 , g] as inputs. We also halve the values of this new weight matrix to make it Win′ =
[Win /2; Win /2], ensuring its output 0.5(Win s0 +Win g) will follow a distribution similar to the output
by the original first layer Win s0 . While this surgery alone cannot perfectly close the gap, the resultant
modified encoder can serve as a capable initialization for the transition encoder hψ . We further fine-
tune hψ on the labeled robot dataset DL using the aforementioned method to adapt it for instruction-
following tasks.

C.3   Negative Sampling

For training the contrastive objective on DL , our batch sampling strategy is non-standard. We use 2
dataloaders in parallel; the first samples from shuffled trajectories, while the second iterates through


                                                    12
trajectories in the order that they are stored in the dataset. Each samples batches of 128 trajectories
and they are concatenated to produce a batch size of 256. The reason for this is that if we were to use
a standard sampling strategy, most examples in a batch would be from different scenes. This is not
useful for the contrastive loss because the representations would just learn to distinguish tasks based
on the set of objects that appear. The robot benefits from being able to distinguish different tasks in
the same scene, so we try to include many trajectories from the same scene in each batch. Using an
unshuffled dataloder is a convenient way to achieve this since trajectories from the same scene are
stored together. This can be considered a form of negative mining for the contrastive learning stage.

C.4   Instruction Augmentation

In order to increase the diversity of language annotations, we augment our natural language anno-
tations using GPT-3.5. Through the API, we query the gpt-3.5-turbo model to generate paraphrases
of instructions in our dataset. We generate 5 paraphrases per instruction and sample from them
randomly during training. An example prompt and response are shown below. We found in prelim-
inary experiments that using augmented instructions slightly improved language generalization, so
we keep this augmentation for all models and baselines.

Prompt:
    Generate 5 variations of the following command:
    "put the mushroom in the metal pot"
    Number them like 1. 2. 3.
    Be concise and use synonyms.
Response:
    1. Place the fungus in the metallic container.
    2. Insert the mushroom into the steel vessel.
    3. Set the toadstool inside the iron cauldron.
    4. Position the champignon within the tin pot.
    5. Place the fungi in the metallic kettle.

C.5   Goal Relabeling

For unlabeled trajectories in DU , we use a simple goal relabeling strategy: with 50% probability,
we use the final achieved state as the goal, and with 50 % probability we uniformly sample an
intermediate state in the trajectory to use as the goal. We do not relabel the annotated trajectories in
DL .

C.6   Hyperparameters

When training the task encoders using the contrastive learning objective, we use a batch size of 256.
We reduce the batch size to 128 when we train the policy network. We use the Adam optimizer
with a learning rate schedule that uses linear warmup and cosine decay. The peak learning rate is
3e-4 for all parameters except the CLIP ViT encoders, for which we use 3e-5. We use 2000 warmup
steps and 2e6 decay steps for the learning rate schedule. When we jointly train the alignment and
behavioral cloning losses, we use a weight of 1.0 on both terms. These hyperparameters were found
through random search. We train our models for 150k steps, which takes around 13 hours on 2
Google Cloud TPU cores.


D     Experimental Details

The scenes were constructed with the objects shown in Table 1 within a toy kitchen setup.
During evaluation, we roll out the policy given the instruction for 60 steps. Task success determined
by a human according to the following criteria:


                                                  13
       • Tasks that involve putting an object into or on top of a container (e.g. pot, pan, towel) are
         judged successes if any part of the object lies within or on top of the container.

       • Tasks that involve moving an object toward a certain direction are judged successes if the
         object is moved sufficiently in the correct direction to be visually noticeable.

       • Tasks that involve moving an object to a location relative to another object are judged
         successes if the object ends in the correct quadrant and are aligned with the reference object
         as instructed. For example, in ”place the knife in front of the microwave”, the knife should
         be placed in the top-left quadrant, and be overlapping with the microwave in the horizontal
         axis.

       • If the robot attempts to grasp any object other than the one instructed, and this results in a
         movement of the object, then the episode is judged a failure.



                                                   Table 1: Evaluation Scenes
                                      Scene         Objects
                                           A        knife, pepper, towel, & pot
                                           B        mushroom, towel, spoon, & pot
                                           C        towel




E    Experimental Results

We show per-task success rates for our approaches, the baselines, and the ablations in this section.
The tasks in scenes A and B were evaluated for 10 trials each, while those in C were evaluated for 5
trials.


                                            Table 2: Comparison of Approaches
                                                                                Success Rate
    Scene     Task                                            GRIF    LCBC         LLfP        R3M   BC-Z
              put the yellow bell pepper on the cloth         0.6       0.0         0.0        0.0   0.6
     ......




              move the pan to the front                       1.0       0.0         0.6        0.0   0.0
              put the pan on the towel                        0.8       0.0         0.3        0.0   0.9
              move the bell pepper to the left of the table   0.7       0.0         0.0        0.0   0.8
     A        put the bell pepper in the pan                  0.8       0.0         0.1        0.0   0.3
     ......




              put the knife on the purple cloth               0.7       0.0         0.2        0.0   0.0
              place the knife in front of the microwave       0.7       0.0         0.0        0.0   0.1
              move the pan in front of the cloth              0.6       0.0         0.3        0.0   0.0
              put the mushroom in the metal pot               0.9       0.0         0.5        0.0   0.4
     .




     B        put the spoon on the towel                      0.9       0.0         0.3        0.0   0.4
              place the metal pot on top of the blue towel    0.8       0.0         0.0        0.0   0.2
     .




              move the towel to the left                      1.0       0.0         1.0        0.0   1.0
     ..




              move the towel to the front                     1.0       0.0         1.0        0.0   1.0
     C        move the towel next to the cans                 0.6       0.0         0.0        0.0   0.2
     ..




              move the towel next to the microwave            1.0       0.0         0.2        0.0   0.8


                                                               14
                                               Table 3: Comparison of Ablations
                                                                              Success Rate
    Scene     Task                                            GRIF (Frozen)   GRIF (Joint)   GRIF (Labeled)
     ......   put the yellow bell pepper on the cloth             0.6             0.8            1.0
              move the pan to the front                           1.0             1.0            0.7
              put the pan on the towel                            0.8             1.0            0.1
              move the bell pepper to the left of the table       0.7             0.4            0.2
     A        put the bell pepper in the pan                      0.8             0.6            1.0
     ......



              put the knife on the purple cloth                   0.7             0.4            0.1
              place the knife in front of the microwave           0.7             0.6            0.5
              move the pan in front of the cloth                  0.6             0.9            0.2
                                                                No Start       No Align        No CLIP
              put the yellow bell pepper on the cloth             0.3             0.5            0.0
     ......




              move the pan to the front                           0.6             0.8            0.0
              put the pan on the towel                            0.6             0.6            0.0
              move the bell pepper to the left of the table       0.4             0.6            0.2
     A        put the bell pepper in the pan                      0.7             0.6            0.1
     ......




              put the knife on the purple cloth                   0.2             0.2            0.0
              place the knife in front of the microwave           0.1             0.0            0.0
              move the pan in front of the cloth                  0.4             0.0            0.3


F     Ablation of Number of Annotations




    Figure 6: Scaling of GRIF grounding capability by number of language annotations available.


We ablate effect of the amount of language supervision on GRIF’s grounding capabilities. We com-
pute the (top-5) text-to-image retrieval accuracy of GRIF representations when trained on 7k, 5k,
3k, and 1k annotations, and find accuracies of 86%, 81%, 73%, and 52% respectively. These accu-
racies are plotted in Figure 6. By comparing these accuracies with the grounding performance of the
ablations in Figure 5, we see GRIF enables more robust grounding with little language supervision.




                                                                 15
