              Mechanistic Interpretability for Steering
                 Vision-Language-Action Models
                   Bear Häon∗ Kaylene Stocking∗ Ian Chuang Claire Tomlin
                    Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
                                University of California, Berkeley




Figure 1: We present a framework for steering Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models. We
extract FFN vectors, project them to the VLA token space, cluster them by semantic alignment, and
inject activations at inference time to modulate behavior. Our experiments demonstrate interpretable
zero-shot control in both simulation (O PEN VLA in LIBERO) and on a physical robot (π0 on a UR5).

           Abstract: Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models are a promising path to re-
           alizing generalist embodied agents that can quickly adapt to new tasks, modal-
           ities, and environments. However, methods for interpreting and steering VLAs
           fall far short of classical robotics pipelines, which are grounded in explicit mod-
           els of kinematics, dynamics, and control. This lack of mechanistic insight is a
           central challenge for deploying learned policies in real-world robotics, where ro-
           bustness and explainability are critical. Motivated by advances in mechanistic
           interpretability for large language models, we introduce the first framework for
           interpreting and steering VLAs via their internal representations, enabling
           direct intervention in model behavior at inference time. We project feedfor-
           ward activations within transformer layers onto the token embedding basis, iden-
           tifying sparse semantic directions - such as speed and direction - that are causally
           linked to action selection. Leveraging these findings, we introduce a general-
           purpose activation steering method that modulates behavior in real time, without
           fine-tuning, reward signals, or environment interaction. We evaluate this method
           on two recent open-source VLAs, π0 and O PEN VLA, and demonstrate zero-shot
           behavioral control in simulation (LIBERO) and on a physical robot (UR5). This
           work demonstrates that interpretable components of embodied VLAs can be
           systematically harnessed for control—establishing a new paradigm for trans-
           parent and steerable foundation models in robotics.
   ∗
       Equal contribution. Correspondence to: {bear.haon, kaylene}@berkeley.edu


9th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2025), Seoul, Korea.
         Keywords: Mechanistic Interpretability, Vision-Language-Action Models, Foun-
         dation Models for Robotics

1   Introduction

Large language-conditioned models represent a paradigm shift for robotics. By leveraging Internet-
scale natural language and image data, these models promise to yield generalist robot policies that
can follow directions, exhibit common-sense reasoning about their environments, and quickly adapt
to novel tasks and scenarios.
One leading type of frontier robotics model is the Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model, where
a pre-trained Vision-Language Model (VLM) is trained to produce robot actions conditioned on a
task description and image observations. While most VLAs are designed to be fine-tuned for specific
tasks, future models may even be able to perform a variety of tasks without the need for fine-tuning.
Indeed, the π0 model [1] can often complete zero-shot evaluation tasks on the DROID platform
[2] and Gemini Robotics demonstrates zero-shot control via code generation [3]. This promise of
generality and ease of deployment signals a large shift in how we deploy robot systems. In contrast
to rigorous evaluation and certification on individual tasks in factories or warehouses, robots will be
placed in novel environments and expected to behave well “out-of-the-box”. This raises important
questions about safety, robustness, and transparency. How and when can we trust that VLA policies
will behave safely? When they fail, how can we diagnose and fix the underlying problems?
A similar set of questions and challenges is being faced by Large Language Model (LLM) re-
searchers. While they have by no means been solved, the field of mechanistic interpretability has
yielded a number of exciting insights about the inner workings of LLMs. For example, researchers
have discovered the functional role of specific attention heads [4] and identified semantically inter-
pretable concepts in model activations [5, 6]. There is also evidence that mechanistic interpretability
can be useful for diagnosing problems with models in practice [7]. These insights lead us to ask:
can mechanistic interpretability also help with understanding and shaping the behavior of frontier
models in robotics?
In this work, we present a series of experiments that together allow us to provide a resounding
affirmative answer. We focus our efforts on an interpretability method that analyzes the semantic
meanings of vectors in the output weight matrix of the transformer block’s feed-forward layer (FFN)
[8]. Although this technique has less power to disentangle concepts that might be spread across
multiple neurons in the model than alternatives such as sparse autoencoders [5], it allows us to
interpret and steer the model without any additional training data. This is a key advantage in robotics
where training data is expensive and difficult to acquire, and where available open datasets are small
compared to what is available in the natural language domain. Our chosen method leads us to several
surprising conclusions about VLAs, including:

      1. Despite being trained to produce only robot actions, the internal activity of the VLA model
         is largely semantic, with less than 25% of FFN neurons being rewired for action prediction
         and a large fraction of the remainder representing clear, semantically interpretable concepts.
      2. Internal model concepts such as “slow” are causally linked to robot actions that express
         these concepts (i.e. moving the end effector more slowly), despite the model being trained
         without any feedback on the meaning or consequences of different action tokens.
      3. Targeted interventions on model concepts allow VLA behavior to be modified at inference
         time out-of-the-box, without any fine-tuning data or environment interaction required to
         select the intervention.

These contributions represent the first attempt to use mechanistic interpretability techniques devel-
oped for LLMs with large robotics models. Our exciting initial results speak to the great promise
of adapting these techniques to the robotics context, where there is an especially strong need for AI
models that are safe and transparent.


                                                  2
2     Related Work

Mechanistic Interpretability and Robotics. The size and complexity of deep learning systems
make it challenging for humans to understand how they arrive at a particular output from a given
input. To help address this problem, a variety of methods have been proposed to help expose and
interpret the internal representations and computations in models. The most powerful form of in-
terpretability work doesn’t simply yield qualitative insights, but elucidates the causal mechanisms
that determine the output of the model - this is often referred to as “mechanistic interpretability”.
Despite promising developments in mechanistic interpretability in the vision [9] and natural lan-
guage [5, 10, 11] settings, there has been relatively little work investigating DNN interpretability for
robotics. In [12], they aim to interpret a deep learned policy by associating its factors of variation
with logic rules, but the system they investigate is small in scale. In [13], they use techniques in-
spired by vision interpretability work to improve a robotic image-condititioned policy. Finally, there
has been recent interest in interpretability for reinforcement learning policies, as surveyed in [14].

3     Interpreting VLAs

Deep neural networks build their predictions layer by layer, with features in one layer supporting
further computations and representations in the next. According to the “linear representation hy-
pothesis”, intermediate network layers often represent different features or concepts as directions in
the latent embedding space [15]. This means that if, for example, a model represents the concept
of “fast”, if we can identify the corresponding direction in its latent space, we can understand when
and how the model uses this concept to produce its final output. Serendipitously, it turns out that for
many large models, semantically meaningful directions align with individual neurons. This fact has
been used to help interpret both vision [9] and language [16, 8] models. Recently, there has been ex-
citement around using sparse autoencoders (SAEs) to uncover even more meaningful directions [5].
However, training SAEs require large amounts of data, and the results vary depending on the exact
dataset used. Both of these factors are significant barriers in the robotics context, where open-source
datasets are limited and are unlikely to cover all of the semantic concepts that the model learned and
might retain from VLM pretraining. Therefore, in our work, we focus on single-neuron features.
Specifically, we follow the approach outlined in [8] and focus on the feedforward layer of each
transformer block:
                                     FFN(x) = fθ (x)T Wθ                                    (1)

where x ∈ Rn is the input to the layer, fθ (x) ∈ Rm is an input-dependent set of activations, and
                                                                (i)
Wθ ∈ Rm×n is an input-independent parameter matrix. Using wθ ∈ Rn to refer to the ith row of
Wθ , Equation (1) can be rewritten as follows:
                                                            (i)
                                               X
                                    FFN(x) =     [fθ (x)]i wθ                                  (2)
                                                   i
                                                                     (i)
This allows us to interpret the FFN as a weighted sum over the wθ vectors, which we refer to as
value vectors. Since these vectors are independent of the inputs, they can be thought of as basis
functions for the output of the FFN. Furthermore, as they belong to the same linear space as the final
output of the transformer, they can be interpreted as probability distributions over possible output
tokens. Therefore, we can assign semantic meanings to value vectors based on the set of tokens to
which they assign the highest probability.

3.1   How does VLA Training Affect Concepts Learned During VLM Pre-training?

During VLA training, a pre-trained VLM is fine-tuned to imitate the control actions of expert robot
trajectories conditioned on a task description and image and/or state observation, using a dataset
such as Open X-Embodiment [17]. The most common strategy for handling the actions, followed
by VLAs such as RT-2 [18], O PEN VLA [19], and π0 -FAST [2], is to denote a small set of rarely
used VLM tokens as “action tokens” to be decoded into control outputs. The final output of the


                                                   3
(a) Meaningful patterns in top value vector tokens. VLA training        (b) Action tokens are incorporated
does not substantially change the proportion of FFN value vectors       into every layer of the VLA. However,
which have interpretable patterns (top lighter bars) and semantically   they make up the largest proportion of
meaningful patterns (bold bottom bars) in their top tokens.             final layer value vectors.
Figure 2: VLA training incorporates action tokens into FFN value vectors but retains semantic
meanings from VLM pre-training.

model during VLA training is exclusively action tokens, which raises the question: does the VLA
still use natural language-like representations to choose appropriate control actions? If so, how do
language and action interact in the trained model? Our chosen interpretability technique allows us
some insight into these questions:
VLA Value Vectors Retain Semantic Meanings. First, we aimed to quantify whether the VLM
value vectors represent semantically interpretable concepts, and if so, whether this is preserved after
VLA training. We focused on π0 and its base pretrained VLM, PaliGemma-3B [20], because its
larger vocabulary size, compared to O PEN VLA’ S Llama2-7B base VLM [21], makes individual
tokens easier to interpret. We randomly selected 10 value vectors from each layer of the VLM
and VLA models and examined whether at least 4 of the top 30 tokens followed a common pattern
(adopting the methodology from [8]. The results are shown in Figure 2a. Value vectors throughout
both the VLM and VLA models exhibit identifiable patterns, many of them semantic, at similar rates.
Therefore, VLA training does not cause FFN outputs to lose meaningful organization of concepts,
despite producing only non-semantic tokens at the final output. We show qualitative examples of
value vectors in the Appendix.
Action Tokens Appear in All VLA Layers. We show the proportion of top-100 tokens which are
action tokens for value vectors in each layer of the model (Figure 2b). For both O PEN VLA and π0 ,
action tokens are most common at the final layer, but make up at least a few percent of every layer.
This suggests that there is not a hard transition from “thinking about the task” in earlier layers to
“thinking about control” in later layers. Instead, it appears VLA models learn to reason about and
refine their control action predictions continuously, starting from their earliest computations.

3.2   How Task-Specific Fine-Tuning Affects VLA Concepts

After VLA pre-training, models generally need to be fine-tuned for a specific robot setup and set
of tasks to realize good performance. To understand what happens to the value vectors during fine-
tuning, we compared the base π0 -FAST model with a checkpoint fine-tuned on the DROID dataset
[22]. We compared top tokens in the value vectors using a two-proportion z-test statistic to quantify
the significance of an increase (or decrease) in the number of occurrences of each token between the
two models. Our results are shown in Figure 3a and 3b. We find that action tokens account almost
exclusively for the most significant differences between the two sets of value vectors, and that this
shift occurs because the fine-tuned model develops a more uneven, specialized distribution across
action tokens compared to the relatively flat distribution of the pre-trained model. There is also a
modest boost to some of the most common tokens in the DROID task instructions: these tokens
appear 1.2 times more frequently in the fine-tuned model value vectors than in the pre-trained ones
(see the Appendix for more details). Overall, these results suggest that the main effect of fine-tuning


                                                      4
(a) Task fine-tuning mainly affects action tokens. The most up- (b) Fine-tuning induces a more special-
weighted and down-weighted tokens between the π0 -FAST and ized (less general) distribution of action
π0 -FAST-DROID-finetune models are action tokens.               tokens across value vectors.
           Figure 3: Task fine-tuning mainly affects action tokens in FFN value vectors.
is to re-wire the model to more easily produce action tokens utilized in the fine-tuning tasks and
neglect the others, with only a modest effect on semantic tokens.

3.3   Summary

The above results suggest that VLAs reason about control actions by mixing semantic concepts from
pre-training with action tokens at all layers. However, these results do not prove a direct causal link
between specific semantic concepts and robot behavior. If such a link exists, we expect to be able to
intervene on semantic concepts to change behavior. In the following section, we examine whether
the semantic concepts we uncovered can support such interventions.

4     Steering VLAs

We formalize our method for interpretable activation-level steering of VLAs (Figure 1). This tech-
nique modifies selected neurons within the FFN submodules of transformer blocks inside the VLA’s
base VLM, steering robot behavior in real time - without fine-tuning or environment reward signal.
Let x ∈ Rn be the residual input to a transformer FFN. As shown in Equation (2), the FFN output
                                   (i)
is a sum of fixed value vectors wθ ∈ Rn weighted by input-dependent activations fθ (x) ∈ Rm .
Motivated by evidence that individual FFN neurons encode semantic features [16, 5], we override
a subset S ⊆ {1, . . . , m} of activations using a fixed scalar α ∈ R. Each S corresponds to an
interpretable neuron cluster aligned with a control concept - e.g., fast, up, careful - identified by
grouping neurons with similar token projections (Figure 1, steps 1–3), either manually or via kNN
over semantic embeddings.
                                            
                                  ˜ (i)       α          if i ∈ S
                                  fθ (x) =                                                         (3)
                                              [fθ (x)]i otherwise
                                                     m
                                                             (i)      (i)
                                                     X
                                  FFNsteered (x) =         f˜θ (x) · wθ                            (4)
                                                     i=1

This induces a residual shift ∆x = FFNsteered (x) − FFN(x) that propagates through the transformer
and modulates the final VLA action token distribution.
Implementation. In O PEN VLA (PyTorch), we apply a forward hook on the FFN’s down proj to
overwrite neuron activations. In π0 (JAX), the neuron indices S and activation coefficient α are
passed into a refactored FFN. Both realize the same operator ISα (fθ (x)) for real-time robot control.

4.1   Simulation Experiments

We evaluate our VLA steering method within the suite of ten long-horizon manipulation tasks mak-
ing up the LIBERO-Long benchmark [23], visualized in Figure 4. Rollouts are seeded determin-


                                                     5
Figure 4: Sample tasks from LIBERO-Long. Six representative long-horizon tasks - involving
sequential manipulation goals such as object placement, containment, and appliance interaction.




(a) Steering motion magnitude interventions. The               (b) Temporal localization interventions. Mean Y-
effect of fast and slow cluster interventions across           displacement for up-cluster activations injected at
cluster sizes and activation coefficients. Fast clusters       early, late, and full model depths. Full clusters pro-
consistently lead to larger end-effector displacement.         duce the largest average motion effects.
         Figure 5: Simulation results: Steering O PEN VLA with value vector interventions.



istically for reproducibility, enabling precise comparisons between baseline and intervention tra-
jectories. All simulation experiments use the 7B-parameter O PEN VLA model, with the fine-tuned
LIBERO-Long checkpoint, implemented in PyTorch and executed on a NVIDIA H100 GPU.
Steering Motion Interventions. To evaluate whether interpretable semantic structure in VLA value
vectors can steer physical behavior, we construct fast and slow aligned clusters by manually select-
ing value vectors whose top-projected tokens reflect motion magnitude semantics. These clusters
are injected into the model’s residual stream with a fixed coefficient, sweeping over cluster sizes
[10, 20] and activation strengths [2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 20]. Each configuration is evaluated over 10 long-
horizon tasks, using 10 rollouts per task. The fast clusters consistently induce larger end-effector
displacements across tasks, with an average improvement of 27.73% over slow clusters and max-
imum gains of 148.54% in some configurations. All 10 matched comparisons yield statistically
significant differences (p < 0.001, paired t-test), and effect sizes (d = −0.091 – 1.419) suggest
consistent directional influence. These results demonstrate that directional behavior can be modu-
lated by activating semantically interpretable value vectors alone (Figure 5a).
Temporal Localization Interventions. We examine how the position of activated value vectors
within the VLA affects steering performance. Using kNN clustering over token-projected value
vector embeddings, we extract up-themed clusters and restrict their injection to early, late, or all
layers. Each configuration spans three cluster sizes and six activation coefficients, with all other
variables held constant. Across conditions, full-layer interventions yielded the largest average Y-
displacements of the end-effector (µ = 0.098), followed by late-layer (µ = 0.086) and early-layer
(µ = 0.007) injections. Effect-size contrasts were most pronounced between early and late depths
(d = −0.376), smaller between early and full (d = −0.321), and negligible between late and full
(d = −0.062). As shown in Figure 5b, full-layer activations have the strongest effect on average,
yet late-layer interventions can match them at higher intensities and larger cluster sizes. This is
consistent with the expectation of explicit motion semantics concentrating in the model’s final stages.


                                                           6
           Low/High Transport
             Low/High  Transport                                             Slow/Fast Transport
                                                                                Slow/Fast Transport




                                             LowLow                                                               Slow
                                                                                                               Slow

                                             HighHigh                                                          FastFast

(a) Low/high transport. The robot picks up a toy              (b) Slow/fast transport. The robot picks up a toy
penguin and places it into a basket, with variations in       seal and places it onto a plate, with variations in the
the robot’s trajectory height during data collection.         robot’s movement speed during data collection.
                     Figure 6: Physical robot experiments: Steering π0 on a UR5.

4.2   Robot Experiments

We also evaluate our VLA steering method using the 3B-parameter π0 -FAST VLA on a real robot.
Specifically, we test the ability to steer binary control opposites - slow vs. fast and low vs. high - in
two pick-and-place tasks with a UR5 robot arm. We use a JAX implementation of π0 -FAST running
on a NVIDIA A4500 GPU. Details on our custom robot setup are provided in the Appendix.
Fine-Tuning. Unlike benchmarks such as DROID, which use a standardized robot platform and
include fine-tuned π0 -FAST checkpoints, our robot setup is not represented in the π0 -FAST training
data and cannot reasonably perform tasks zero-shot. To enable meaningful evaluation, we fine-
tune with LoRA [24] on small datasets collected from our robot. Although fine-tuning on a limited
dataset may hinder generalization and steering capability, it enables controlled experimentation: we
manage the full data collection process and can introduce variations and behaviors in the robot data
that we wish to steer during evaluation. Crucially, we do not explicitly label these variations in
the VLA prompt during training, allowing us to test whether the VLA can reproduce these specific
behaviors through steering by associating them with high-level semantic concepts.
Robot Tasks. We evaluate steering on two tasks. The first task, Low/High Transport, involves the
robot picking up a toy penguin and placing it in a basket and includes 75 episodes with unlabeled
variations in how high the penguin is lifted during transport. The second task, Slow/Fast Trans-
port, involves the robot picking up a toy seal and placing it on a specified plate and includes 120
episodes with variations in the speed of the robot’s motion. Visualizations of both tasks are shown
in Figures 6a and 6b, and data collection and fine-tuning details are provided in the Appendix.
For both tasks, we evaluate steering interventions where we hand-select and upweight a cluster of
semantically meaningful vectors. We create a low and high themed cluster for Low/High Transport
and slow and fast themed cluster for Slow/Fast Transport. We also compare these interventions
against several baselines: (1) running the model without any intervention, (2) adding qualitative
descriptors to the prompt (e.g. appending low to the beginning of the prompt), and (3) applying
steering with randomly upweighted vectors. These comparisons evaluate the model’s default behav-
ior without intervention, whether prompt modification alone can influence behavior, and whether
selecting steering vectors based on semantic concepts are more effective than simply selecting ran-
dom vectors. Specific details on each steering intervention and baseline is in the Appendix.
Task Evaluation. For Low/High Transport, we perform 10 independent rollouts for each steering
variant and baseline and analyze the maximum height of the end-effector relative to the robot’s base
over the course of the task. We then record the maximum height across 10 rollouts for each variant
in Figure 7a. In Slow/Fast Transport, we focus on measuring the robot’s speed. To do this in a
consistent manner we run inference for all steering variants and baselines simultaneously, but only
execute the baseline predicted action with no intervention. We measure average end-effector dis-


                                                          7
(a) Low/high transport. Box plots for maximum end-              (b) Slow/fast transport. Box plots for average end-
effector height (cm) showing distribution across 10             effector displacement (mm) between each successive
rollouts for each steering intervention (intv.) and base-       action showing distribution across 10 rollouts for each
line.                                                           steering intervention (intv.) and baseline.
                   Figure 7: Physical robot experiments: Binary control opposites.


placement between each step along the trajectory across 10 rollouts for each variant and plot results
in Figure 7b. More detailed analysis of individual trajectories for both tasks are in the Appendix.
Robot Results. Our results suggest that steering interventions can meaningfully influence the ac-
tions of π0 -FAST. In the Low/High Transport task, the low intervention generated the lowest overall
trajectories. Similarly, the slow intervention in Slow/Fast Transport resulted in the slowest overall
movements. However, while low and slow interventions clearly altered behavior, their opposites
(high and fast) resembled the baseline without intervention. This may be because the model already
“considers” the baseline trajectory to be fast and high. Nevertheless, the minimal difference between
using a random intervention compared to no intervention suggests that choosing semantically mean-
ingful vectors can more effectively guide the model towards desired behavior. Finally, we found
that steering interventions were more impactful than simply adding target descriptive words to the
prompt. In both tasks, modifying the prompt had weaker impact than our steering intervention.



5    Discussion and Conclusion

This work shows that VLAs can be steered via interpretable internal components. By activat-
ing sparse, semantically meaningful neurons in FFN layers—aligned with concepts like “up” and
“slow”—we modulate robot behavior at inference time. Experiments demonstrate that our method
generalizes across models and tasks, influencing both simulated and real-world behavior, including
long-horizon LIBERO tasks and binary control opposites on a UR5.
From a mechanistic perspective, this work provides causal evidence that VLAs retain structured,
compositional semantics even after fine-tuning. That activating a small set of semantically aligned
neurons can shift motion behavior suggests control-relevant features remain accessible and manipu-
lable. These effects emerge without explicit behavioral supervision, indicating that VLAs internalize
semantic concepts during pretraining in a way that supports compositional reasoning across layers.
For robotics practitioners, this method offers a simple, interpretable tool for post-deployment
behavior shaping. It requires no retraining, runs on existing policies, and enables fast testing and
adjustment. Our experiments show that it can modulate some aspects of robot behavior—such as
end-effector speed or height—and suggest that this modulation may be more effective than using
modified prompts.
Looking ahead, activation steering opens a new interpretable control interface for guiding VLA
behavior. As embodied foundation models become more capable, steering techniques could play
an important role in inspecting, auditing, and intervening in how models reason and act. We see
this approach—using just one tool from the mechanistic interpretability toolbox—as a step toward
a broader class of transparent, steerable, and semantically grounded control tools for robotics.


                                                            8
6   Limitations

This work introduces one of the first interpretable control knobs for foundation models in robotics,
enabling behavior to be modulated through semantically grounded activations without retraining.
Establishing such control-layer transparency is a step toward safe, adaptive embodied AI. While
the results are promising, several challenges remain, including reliably mapping internal structure
to behavior and scaling to more general settings. Addressing these challenges presents concrete
opportunities to advance the robustness, generality, and practical utility of activation-based steering.
Semantic Ambiguity and Representational Drift. Our clustering method is based on token-level
semantic similarity rather than direct behavioral outcomes. For example, approaches like kNN over
token-projected value vectors assume that local similarity implies shared semantics. In practice,
clusters can conflate distinct behaviors—e.g., “slow and careful” versus “slow and stuck”—leading
to inconsistent effects. Furthermore, we found that the meaning of value vectors can shift across
models, tasks, and time. A vector aligned with “up” in one context may behave differently in
another. Understanding and mitigating this representational drift will be critical for developing
steering interventions that transfer reliably across domains and deployment scenarios.
Fine-Tuning and Steerability. We do not yet fully understand how VLA fine-tuning affects steer-
ability. While some semantic directions appear to retain causal influence after adaptation, it’s pos-
sible that fine-tuning alters internal representations in ways that make VLM-pretrained concepts
harder to access or less aligned with behavior. Investigating how steerable directions evolve with
continued training is an ideal direction for future work.
Evaluation Scope and Generalization. Our evaluations, while spanning both simulation and hard-
ware, are limited to pick-and-place tasks with a robot arm. Extending to mobile and bimanual
platforms, as well as unstructured environments, will be important for validating control stability,
generalization under physical variation, and alignment with human intent across real-world settings.




                                                   9
Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the NSF Safe Learning Enabled Systems Program, the DARPA Assured
Neuro Symbolic Learning and Reasoning Program, and the ONR project “Leveraging Egocentric
and Allocentric Representations for Navigation (LEARN)”.
Bear Häon was additionally supported by the Schmidt Futures Quad Fellowship, NSF DToD
Fellowship, and Foresight Institute Fellowship during the development of this work. He thanks the
ERA Fellowship at the University of Cambridge for early exposure to mechanistic interpretability
during his time as a 2023 AI Safety Fellow.



References
 [1] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Haus-
     man, B. Ichter, S. Jakubczak, T. Jones, L. Ke, S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair,
     K. Pertsch, L. X. Shi, J. Tanner, Q. Vuong, A. Walling, H. Wang, and U. Zhilinsky. π0 : A
     vision-language-action flow model for general robot control, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
     org/abs/2410.24164.

 [2] K. Pertsch, K. Stachowicz, B. Ichter, D. Driess, S. Nair, Q. Vuong, O. Mees, C. Finn, and
     S. Levine. FAST: Efficient action tokenization for vision-language-action models, 2025. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.09747.

 [3] G. R. Team, S. Abeyruwan, J. Ainslie, J.-B. Alayrac, M. G. Arenas, T. Armstrong, A. Balakr-
     ishna, R. Baruch, M. Bauza, M. Blokzijl, S. Bohez, K. Bousmalis, A. Brohan, T. Buschmann,
     A. Byravan, S. Cabi, K. Caluwaerts, F. Casarini, O. Chang, J. E. Chen, X. Chen, H.-T. L. Chi-
     ang, K. Choromanski, D. D’Ambrosio, S. Dasari, T. Davchev, C. Devin, N. D. Palo, T. Ding,
     A. Dostmohamed, D. Driess, Y. Du, D. Dwibedi, M. Elabd, C. Fantacci, C. Fong, E. Frey,
     C. Fu, M. Giustina, K. Gopalakrishnan, L. Graesser, L. Hasenclever, N. Heess, B. Hernaez,
     A. Herzog, R. A. Hofer, J. Humplik, A. Iscen, M. G. Jacob, D. Jain, R. Julian, D. Kalashnikov,
     M. E. Karagozler, S. Karp, C. Kew, J. Kirkland, S. Kirmani, Y. Kuang, T. Lampe, A. Laurens,
     I. Leal, A. X. Lee, T.-W. E. Lee, J. Liang, Y. Lin, S. Maddineni, A. Majumdar, A. H. Michaely,
     R. Moreno, M. Neunert, F. Nori, C. Parada, E. Parisotto, P. Pastor, A. Pooley, K. Rao, K. Rey-
     mann, D. Sadigh, S. Saliceti, P. Sanketi, P. Sermanet, D. Shah, M. Sharma, K. Shea, C. Shu,
     V. Sindhwani, S. Singh, R. Soricut, J. T. Springenberg, R. Sterneck, R. Surdulescu, J. Tan,
     J. Tompson, V. Vanhoucke, J. Varley, G. Vesom, G. Vezzani, O. Vinyals, A. Wahid, S. Welker,
     P. Wohlhart, F. Xia, T. Xiao, A. Xie, J. Xie, P. Xu, S. Xu, Y. Xu, Z. Xu, Y. Yang, R. Yao,
     S. Yaroshenko, W. Yu, W. Yuan, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, A. Zhou, and Y. Zhou. Gemini robotics:
     Bringing ai into the physical world, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.20020.

 [4] C. Olsson, N. Elhage, N. Nanda, N. Joseph, N. DasSarma, T. Henighan, B. Mann, A. Askell,
     Y. Bai, A. Chen, T. Conerly, D. Drain, D. Ganguli, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, D. Hernandez, S. John-
     ston, A. Jones, J. Kernion, L. Lovitt, K. Ndousse, D. Amodei, T. Brown, J. Clark, J. Kaplan,
     S. McCandlish, and C. Olah. In-context learning and induction heads. Transformer Cir-
     cuits Thread, 2022. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2022/in-context-learning-and-induction-
     heads/index.html.

 [5] T. Bricken, A. Templeton, J. Batson, B. Chen, A. Jermyn, T. Conerly, N. Turner, C. Anil,
     C. Denison, A. Askell, R. Lasenby, Y. Wu, S. Kravec, N. Schiefer, T. Maxwell, N. Joseph,
     Z. Hatfield-Dodds, A. Tamkin, K. Nguyen, B. McLean, J. E. Burke, T. Hume, S. Carter,
     T. Henighan, and C. Olah. Towards monosemanticity: Decomposing language mod-
     els with dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. https://transformer-
     circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.


                                                10
 [6] H. Cunningham, A. Ewart, L. Riggs, R. Huben, and L. Sharkey. Sparse autoencoders find
     highly interpretable features in language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2309.08600.

 [7] S. Marks, J. Treutlein, T. Bricken, J. Lindsey, J. Marcus, S. Mishra-Sharma, D. Ziegler,
     E. Ameisen, J. Batson, T. Belonax, S. R. Bowman, S. Carter, B. Chen, H. Cunningham,
     C. Denison, F. Dietz, S. Golechha, A. Khan, J. Kirchner, J. Leike, A. Meek, K. Nishimura-
     Gasparian, E. Ong, C. Olah, A. Pearce, F. Roger, J. Salle, A. Shih, M. Tong, D. Thomas,
     K. Rivoire, A. Jermyn, M. MacDiarmid, T. Henighan, and E. Hubinger. Auditing language
     models for hidden objectives, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.10965.

 [8] M. Geva, A. Caciularu, K. R. Wang, and Y. Goldberg. Transformer feed-forward layers build
     predictions by promoting concepts in the vocabulary space, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
     org/abs/2203.14680.

 [9] C. Olah, A. Mordvintsev, and L. Schubert. Feature visualization. Distill, 2017. doi:10.23915/
     distill.00007. https://distill.pub/2017/feature-visualization.

[10] J. Lindsey, W. Gurnee, E. Ameisen, B. Chen, A. Pearce, N. L. Turner, C. Citro, D. Abra-
     hams, S. Carter, B. Hosmer, J. Marcus, M. Sklar, A. Templeton, T. Bricken, C. McDougall,
     H. Cunningham, T. Henighan, A. Jermyn, A. Jones, A. Persic, Z. Qi, T. B. Thompson, S. Zim-
     merman, K. Rivoire, T. Conerly, C. Olah, and J. Batson. On the biology of a large language
     model. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2025. URL https://transformer-circuits.pub/
     2025/attribution-graphs/biology.html.

[11] K. Meng, D. Bau, A. Andonian, and Y. Belinkov. Locating and editing factual associations in
     gpt. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:17359–17372, 2022.

[12] T.-H. Wang, W. Xiao, T. Seyde, R. Hasani, and D. Rus. Measuring interpretability of neural
     policies of robots with disentangled representation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages
     602–641. PMLR, 2023.

[13] S. Pohland and C. Tomlin. Understanding the dependence of perception model competency
     on regions in an image. In World Conference on Explainable Artificial Intelligence, pages
     130–154. Springer, 2024.

[14] C. Glanois, P. Weng, M. Zimmer, D. Li, T. Yang, J. Hao, and W. Liu. A survey on interpretable
     reinforcement learning. Machine Learning, 113(8):5847–5890, 2024.

[15] K. Park, Y. J. Choe, and V. Veitch. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry
     of large language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 39643–
     39666. PMLR, 2024.

[16] M. Geva, R. Schuster, J. Berant, and O. Levy. Transformer feed-forward layers are key-value
     memories, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.14913.

[17] E. Collaboration, A. O’Neill, A. Rehman, A. Gupta, A. Maddukuri, A. Gupta, A. Padalkar,
     A. Lee, A. Pooley, A. Gupta, A. Mandlekar, A. Jain, A. Tung, A. Bewley, A. Herzog, A. Ir-
     pan, A. Khazatsky, A. Rai, A. Gupta, A. Wang, A. Kolobov, A. Singh, A. Garg, A. Kembhavi,
     A. Xie, A. Brohan, A. Raffin, A. Sharma, A. Yavary, A. Jain, A. Balakrishna, A. Wahid,
     B. Burgess-Limerick, B. Kim, B. Schölkopf, B. Wulfe, B. Ichter, C. Lu, C. Xu, C. Le, C. Finn,
     C. Wang, C. Xu, C. Chi, C. Huang, C. Chan, C. Agia, C. Pan, C. Fu, C. Devin, D. Xu,
     D. Morton, D. Driess, D. Chen, D. Pathak, D. Shah, D. Büchler, D. Jayaraman, D. Kalash-
     nikov, D. Sadigh, E. Johns, E. Foster, F. Liu, F. Ceola, F. Xia, F. Zhao, F. V. Frujeri, F. Stulp,
     G. Zhou, G. S. Sukhatme, G. Salhotra, G. Yan, G. Feng, G. Schiavi, G. Berseth, G. Kahn,
     G. Yang, G. Wang, H. Su, H.-S. Fang, H. Shi, H. Bao, H. B. Amor, H. I. Christensen, H. Fu-
     ruta, H. Bharadhwaj, H. Walke, H. Fang, H. Ha, I. Mordatch, I. Radosavovic, I. Leal, J. Liang,
     J. Abou-Chakra, J. Kim, J. Drake, J. Peters, J. Schneider, J. Hsu, J. Vakil, J. Bohg, J. Bingham,


                                                  11
     J. Wu, J. Gao, J. Hu, J. Wu, J. Wu, J. Sun, J. Luo, J. Gu, J. Tan, J. Oh, J. Wu, J. Lu, J. Yang,
     J. Malik, J. Silvério, J. Hejna, J. Booher, J. Tompson, J. Yang, J. Salvador, J. J. Lim, J. Han,
     K. Wang, K. Rao, K. Pertsch, K. Hausman, K. Go, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Goldberg, K. Byrne,
     K. Oslund, K. Kawaharazuka, K. Black, K. Lin, K. Zhang, K. Ehsani, K. Lekkala, K. Ellis,
     K. Rana, K. Srinivasan, K. Fang, K. P. Singh, K.-H. Zeng, K. Hatch, K. Hsu, L. Itti, L. Y.
     Chen, L. Pinto, L. Fei-Fei, L. Tan, L. J. Fan, L. Ott, L. Lee, L. Weihs, M. Chen, M. Lepert,
     M. Memmel, M. Tomizuka, M. Itkina, M. G. Castro, M. Spero, M. Du, M. Ahn, M. C. Yip,
     M. Zhang, M. Ding, M. Heo, M. K. Srirama, M. Sharma, M. J. Kim, N. Kanazawa, N. Hansen,
     N. Heess, N. J. Joshi, N. Suenderhauf, N. Liu, N. D. Palo, N. M. M. Shafiullah, O. Mees,
     O. Kroemer, O. Bastani, P. R. Sanketi, P. T. Miller, P. Yin, P. Wohlhart, P. Xu, P. D. Fagan,
     P. Mitrano, P. Sermanet, P. Abbeel, P. Sundaresan, Q. Chen, Q. Vuong, R. Rafailov, R. Tian,
     R. Doshi, R. Mart’in-Mart’in, R. Baijal, R. Scalise, R. Hendrix, R. Lin, R. Qian, R. Zhang,
     R. Mendonca, R. Shah, R. Hoque, R. Julian, S. Bustamante, S. Kirmani, S. Levine, S. Lin,
     S. Moore, S. Bahl, S. Dass, S. Sonawani, S. Tulsiani, S. Song, S. Xu, S. Haldar, S. Karamcheti,
     S. Adebola, S. Guist, S. Nasiriany, S. Schaal, S. Welker, S. Tian, S. Ramamoorthy, S. Dasari,
     S. Belkhale, S. Park, S. Nair, S. Mirchandani, T. Osa, T. Gupta, T. Harada, T. Matsushima,
     T. Xiao, T. Kollar, T. Yu, T. Ding, T. Davchev, T. Z. Zhao, T. Armstrong, T. Darrell, T. Chung,
     V. Jain, V. Kumar, V. Vanhoucke, W. Zhan, W. Zhou, W. Burgard, X. Chen, X. Chen, X. Wang,
     X. Zhu, X. Geng, X. Liu, X. Liangwei, X. Li, Y. Pang, Y. Lu, Y. J. Ma, Y. Kim, Y. Chebotar,
     Y. Zhou, Y. Zhu, Y. Wu, Y. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Bisk, Y. Dou, Y. Cho, Y. Lee, Y. Cui, Y. Cao, Y.-H.
     Wu, Y. Tang, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhang, Y. Jiang, Y. Li, Y. Li, Y. Iwasawa, Y. Matsuo, Z. Ma, Z. Xu,
     Z. J. Cui, Z. Zhang, Z. Fu, and Z. Lin. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x
     models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864.

[18] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, X. Chen, K. Choromanski, T. Ding, D. Driess,
     A. Dubey, C. Finn, P. Florence, C. Fu, M. G. Arenas, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Han, K. Hausman,
     A. Herzog, J. Hsu, B. Ichter, A. Irpan, N. Joshi, R. Julian, D. Kalashnikov, Y. Kuang, I. Leal,
     L. Lee, T.-W. E. Lee, S. Levine, Y. Lu, H. Michalewski, I. Mordatch, K. Pertsch, K. Rao,
     K. Reymann, M. Ryoo, G. Salazar, P. Sanketi, P. Sermanet, J. Singh, A. Singh, R. Soricut,
     H. Tran, V. Vanhoucke, Q. Vuong, A. Wahid, S. Welker, P. Wohlhart, J. Wu, F. Xia, T. Xiao,
     P. Xu, S. Xu, T. Yu, and B. Zitkovich. RT-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web
     knowledge to robotic control, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818.

[19] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. P.
     Foster, P. R. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model.
     In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2024.

[20] L. Beyer, A. Steiner, A. S. Pinto, A. Kolesnikov, X. Wang, D. Salz, M. Neumann, I. Al-
     abdulmohsin, M. Tschannen, E. Bugliarello, T. Unterthiner, D. Keysers, S. Koppula, F. Liu,
     A. Grycner, A. Gritsenko, N. Houlsby, M. Kumar, K. Rong, J. Eisenschlos, R. Kabra, M. Bauer,
     M. Bošnjak, X. Chen, M. Minderer, P. Voigtlaender, I. Bica, I. Balazevic, J. Puigcerver, P. Pa-
     palampidi, O. Henaff, X. Xiong, R. Soricut, J. Harmsen, and X. Zhai. PaliGemma: A versatile
     3b vlm for transfer, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07726.

[21] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra,
     P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale, D. Bikel, L. Blecher, C. C. Ferrer, M. Chen, G. Cucurull, D. Esiobu,
     J. Fernandes, J. Fu, W. Fu, B. Fuller, C. Gao, V. Goswami, N. Goyal, A. Hartshorn, S. Hosseini,
     R. Hou, H. Inan, M. Kardas, V. Kerkez, M. Khabsa, I. Kloumann, A. Korenev, P. S. Koura,
     M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lavril, J. Lee, D. Liskovich, Y. Lu, Y. Mao, X. Martinet, T. Mihaylov,
     P. Mishra, I. Molybog, Y. Nie, A. Poulton, J. Reizenstein, R. Rungta, K. Saladi, A. Schelten,
     R. Silva, E. M. Smith, R. Subramanian, X. E. Tan, B. Tang, R. Taylor, A. Williams, J. X. Kuan,
     P. Xu, Z. Yan, I. Zarov, Y. Zhang, A. Fan, M. Kambadur, S. Narang, A. Rodriguez, R. Stojnic,
     S. Edunov, and T. Scialom. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models, 2023. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09288.


                                                 12
[22] A. Khazatsky, K. Pertsch, S. Nair, A. Balakrishna, S. Dasari, S. Karamcheti, S. Nasiriany,
     M. K. Srirama, L. Y. Chen, K. Ellis, et al. Droid: A large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation
     dataset. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2024.
[23] B. Liu, Y. Zhu, C. Gao, Y. Feng, Q. Liu, Y. Zhu, and P. Stone. Libero: Benchmarking
     knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.
     03310.
[24] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, and W. Chen. Lora: Low-
     rank adaptation of large language models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.
     09685.

[25] N. Shazeer. GLU variants improve transformer, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
     2002.05202.




                                                13
A     Steering Intervention Details

Let x ∈ Rn be the residual input to a transformer FFN. As shown in Equation (2), the FFN output
                                   (i)
is a sum of fixed value vectors wθ ∈ Rn weighted by input-dependent activations fθ (x) ∈ Rm .
Motivated by evidence that individual FFN neurons encode semantic features [16, 5], we override
a subset S ⊆ {1, . . . , m} of activations using a fixed scalar α ∈ R. Each S corresponds to an
interpretable neuron cluster aligned with a control concept - e.g., fast, up, careful - identified by
grouping neurons with similar token projections (Figure 1, steps 1–3), either manually or via kNN
over semantic embeddings.
                                            
                                    (i)       α          if i ∈ S
                                  f˜θ (x) =                                                        (5)
                                              [fθ (x)]i otherwise
                                                     m
                                                             (i)      (i)
                                                     X
                                  FFNsteered (x) =         f˜θ (x) · wθ                            (6)
                                                     i=1

This induces a residual shift ∆x = FFNsteered (x) − FFN(x) that propagates through the transformer
and modulates the final VLA action token distribution.
Implementation. In both π0 and O PEN VLA, the FFN layers use a GEGLU activation function [25]
which has the form [fθ (x)]i = [GELU(W1 x)]i · [W2 x]i , where W1 , W2 ∈ Rmxn are additional
parameter matrices. To implement the steering intervention, for π0 (JAX), the neuron indices S
and activation coefficient α are passed into modified FFN code that implements Equation (5). For
O PEN VLA (PyTorch), we apply a forward hook on the FFN’s down proj to overwrite activations.
We also experimented with a modified intervention to O PEN VLA which instead applies the forward
hook to the FFN’s gate proj. This is equivalent to the following:

                                        
                              (i)           GELU(α) · [W2 x]i       if i ∈ S
                            f˜θ (x) =                                                              (7)
                                            [fθ (x)]i               otherwise

We found that this intervention performed similarly to the intervention defined in Equation (5) during
our exploratory experiments.

B     Interpretability Experiments
B.1   Patterns in Value Vectors

Following [8], we classified a value vector as meaningful if 4 of its top 30 predicted tokens followed
a common pattern. Furthermore, we classified patterns as “non-semantic” if they could be explained
by a shallow syntax-level rule, such as words starting with the same 3 letters, and “semantic” oth-
erwise. If multiple different patterns were found, we selected the one containing the highest-ranked
token for determining the classification of the vector. Some examples of vectors from each category
are show in table 1a (PaliGemma VLM) and 1b (π0 VLA). Both models have 18 layers.

B.2   DROID Fine-tuning

To understand whether the contents of the task instructions in the DROID training dataset affected
the value vectors of the model checkpoint fine-tuned on DROID data, we examined whether common
instruction tokens became more common in the value vectors after fine-tuning. Specifically, we first
tokenized all task instructions (including multiple alternative instructions for the same demonstration
where available) using the PaliGemma tokenizer. We then took the top 200 most frequent instruction
tokens and examined the number of times they appeared in the top-100 tokens for each value vector
in the π0 -FAST and π0 -FAST-DROID-finetune model checkpoints. We assign a z-score to each
token based on a two-proportion z-test and plot the results in 8. A positive z-score indicates the
token is more common in the value vectors of π0 -FAST-DROID-finetune compared to π0 -FAST,


                                                   14
 Layer        Pattern type    Pattern description     Top 10 Tokens
      3          None         N/A                     strick, campa, laun, increa, accla, reluct, embra, exem,
                                                      desir, fath
      6      Non-semantic     Camel case variable     <bos>, EndGlobalSection, Clik, expandindo,
                              names                   SourceChecksum, NSCoder, EditorBrowsable, Un-
                                                      usedPrivate, nahilalakip, ScopeManager
      6        Semantic       Image-sourcing web-     pixabay, gettyimages, shutterstock, unsplash, uefa,
                              sites                   Ferdin, plak, makro, Hæ, Lombar
   14          Semantic       Mice and keyboards      mouse, keyboard, keys, KEY, keyboard, Mouse, keys,
                                                      Mouse, mouse, clavier
                   (a) Example value vectors and their top tokens from the PaliGemma VLM.

 Layer        Pattern type    Pattern description     Top 10 Tokens
      1      Non-semantic     Action tokens           <Ac0701>, <Ac0689>, <Ac0706>,
                                                      <Ac0695>, <Ac0714>, <Ac0719>,
                                                      <Ac0684>, <Ac0688>, <Ac0305>,
                                                      <Ac0334>
   14            None         N/A                     maneu, shenan, affor, impra, increa, encomp, fortn, ac-
                                                      cla, philanth, volunte
   15          Semantic       Strong                  tough, strength,tough, toughness, toughest, tougher,
                                                      strong,strength, strongest,strong
   18          Semantic       Given names             javier, jorge, alberto, felipe, Áng, ricardo, eduardo,
                                                      roberto, sergio, fernando
                        (b) Example value vectors and their top tokens from the π0 VLA.



while a negative score indicates that it is more rare in π0 -FAST-DROID-finetune. We find that the
majority of the top instruction tokens are indeed more common in the π0 -FAST-DROID-finetune
value vectors, with a mean z-score of 1.0 and a mean count ratio of 1.2. While some tokens do
have negative z-scores, we hypothesize that these tokens may be even more common in the base
π0 training data instructions, which unfortunately we do not have access to. Overall, these results
suggest that semantic instruction inputs during VLA training may contribute to these tokens being
retained in the value vectors, despite the VLA model being trained to only output action tokens.


Simulation Experiments

B.3       KNN for Temporal Depth Interventions

1. Semantic Embedding Construction. To assign meaning to each value vector, we project it
into the model’s output token space using the language modeling head, as described in Section 3.
                        (i)
For each value vector wθ , we compute token logits and identify the top-5 tokens it most strongly
activates. We then construct a semantic embedding by computing the softmax-weighted average of
those token embeddings:
                                                      (i)
                                         X
                                  e(i)
                                   sem =     softmax(lj ) · Wj
                                               j∈ti

                                                            (i)   (i)                     (i)
where ti are the top token indices for value vector wθ , lj is the logit that wθ assigns to token
j, and Wj is the output embedding vector corresponding to token j. This yields a normalized,
interpretable embedding for each value vector.
2. Depth Partitioning. The full O PEN VLA model contains 352,255 value vectors across all trans-
former layers. To analyze temporal structure, we partition them: the first half (176,128 vectors)
represents early-layer vectors, while the second half represents late-layer vectors.


                                                      15
Figure 8: Common DROID instruction tokens become more common in the value vectors of
a model fine-tuned on the DROID dataset. The majority of the top-200 instruction tokens are
more common in the value vectors of the π0 -FAST-DROID-finetune checkpoint, corresponding to a
positive z-score (lying above the teal dashed line).


3. kNN Clustering. We apply cosine-based k-nearest neighbor (kNN) clustering to these semantic
embeddings using the cuML GPU-accelerated library. Each value vector is assigned a cluster based
on its k nearest neighbors (k ∈ {10, 20, 40}). For each cluster, we compute a semantic centroid by
averaging its members’ embeddings.
4. Concept-Aligned Cluster Selection. To find clusters aligned with a target concept (e.g., “up”),
we tokenize the concept word/phrase using the model’s tokenizer, embed it using the language
modeling head, and compare it to all cluster centroids using cosine similarity. The cluster with
the highest similarity is selected for activation.
5. Temporal Partitioning for Layer-Specific Interventions. To isolate temporal effects, the above
clustering pipeline was run independently on the early-layer and late-layer vector subsets. This
ensured that the selected clusters were sourced exclusively from the intended depth region. For
full-model interventions, clustering was performed on the full set of value vectors.



 Vector     Top 5 Tokens
 153784     up, [action: 0.428], Up, oks, cker
 263055     up, Up, Up, up, pto
 276423     up, coming, Up, up, forth
 225616     up, left, Up, up, Up
 274043     up, Up, Up, up, UP
 285310     up, Up, Up, up, UP
 287766     up, Up, Up, up, UP
 287383     up, Up, Up, up, UP
 263704     Up, up, Up, up, Down
 323343     up, Up, Up, up, UP
Figure 9: Top-5 token projections for the most semantically aligned “up” clusters from the full
model using kNN clustering with k = 10.




                                                 16
Figure 10: Robot Setup: Our hardware experiments use a UR5 robot arm equipped with a Robotiq
2F-140 gripper. The setup includes two cameras: a static scene camera overlooking the workspace
and a wrist-mounted camera facing the gripper.




                (a) Scene Camera                                     (b) Wrist Camera
                  Figure 11: Example of raw images that are input into π0 -FAST.


C     Hardware Experiments

C.1   Data Collection Details

During data collection and evaluation, objects for both tasks are placed within a consistent area with
slight variations in position. In both tasks, the robot begins from the same initial pose with a small
random deviation in position. During data collection, the end-effector is controlled in Cartesian
space using a joystick. Data is recorded at 10 Hz, including images from the wrist-mounted and
scene cameras, arm joint positions, gripper position, and the corresponding target joint and gripper
commands at each timestep. Example images of both cameras are shown in Figure 11.
For Low/High Transport, we collect 75 episodes in total—25 each where the robot transports the toy
penguin at a low, medium, or high height. Each episode is labeled with the prompt, “place penguin


                                                 17
in basket”. For Slow/Fast Transport, we collect 20 episodes each with a slow, medium, or fast speed
and placing the seal on either a blue or white plate, totaling 120 episodes. Each episode is labeled
either with the prompt “place seal on blue plate” or “place seal on white plate” depending on which
plate color the seal is placed on.

C.2        Finetuning π0 -FAST

We use LoRA for fine-tuning π0 -FAST and adopt the default training configuration provided by
the official π0 -FAST codebase1 . Fine-tuning is performed separately for each task, resulting in two
distinct models—one for the Low/High Transport task and one for the Slow/Fast Transport task.
For both tasks, the model input consists of the UR5’s six joint positions, the gripper position, and
both scene and wrist camera images. The model outputs an action chunk as a sequence of joint and
gripper positions. We fine-tune each model for 5000 steps using a batch size of 32 and an action
chunk size of 10. We use preset normalization values provided by π0 -FAST specifically for the
UR5e robot arm.

C.3        Steering Intervention and Baselines

Steering Intervention: We hand-select and upweight a cluster of semantically meaningful value
vectors by a coefficient of 10. Since each value vector can be interpreted as a probability distribution
over output tokens, we examine the top-10 tokens with the highest probabilities for each vector. We
then identify the top six value vectors containing the highest frequency of task-relevant keywords.
For Low/High Transport we search for the keyword “low” for the low intervention and “high” for
the high intervention. For Slow/Fast Transport we search for keywords “slow” and “safe” for the
slow intervention and “fast” and “risk” for the fast intervention. We provide the value vectors used
in the hardware experiments and their top-10 tokens in Table 2.
Random Intervention Baseline: We randomly select a cluster of six value vectors and upweight
them by a coefficient of 10. We keep these vectors the same for the whole evaluation.
No Intervention Baseline: We run inference on π0 -FAST without any modification and use the
same prompt as during fine-tuning: “place penguin in basket” for Low/High Transport and “place
seal on blue plate” for Slow/Fast Transport.
Prompt Modification Baseline: We prepend steering-related keywords to the original prompts used
during finetuning. For Low/High Transport, the prompt “place penguin in basket” is modified to
“low place penguin in basket” or “high place penguin in basket” for the low and high interventions,
respectively. For Slow/Fast Transport, the prompt “place seal on blue plate” is modified to “slow
safe place seal on blue plate” or “fast risk place seal on blue plate” for the slow and fast interventions,
respectively.




      1
          https://github.com/Physical-Intelligence/openpi


                                                    18
 Vector    Top 10 Tokens
  5674     low, low, Low, Low, lower, LOW, lower, lowest, LOW, lows
 253282    low, low, Low, Low, LOW, LOW, Lower, lower, Lower, lowest
 263305    low, high, low, high, High, High, LOW, Low, Low, LOW
 230595    low, medium, LOW, high, low, MEDIUM, Low, Low, Medium, medium
 256528    low, Low, fillType, low, Low, StoreMessageInfo, PerformLayout, LOW, lows, WithIOException
 246672    low, lows, low, Darı́o, cushi, Valentı́n, ecru, LOW, LOW, chaub
                                (a) Low intervention for Low/High Transport.

 Vector    Top 10 Tokens
 260217    high, high, High, High, HIGH, HIGH, low, low, Low, LOW
 265014    high, high, High, High, HIGH, HIGH, hight, shenan, intersper, 高
 266729    high, high, High, High, HIGH, HIGH, highs, 高, middle, hight
 267454    high, High, High, high, HIGH, hight, HIGH, Odys, hig, quitted
 270442    high, high, High, High, HIGH, HIGH, hight, higher, inappro, unwarran
 275165    High, high, high, High, HIGH, HIGH, yüksek, 高, hoog, hight
                               (b) High intervention for Low/High Transport.

 Vector    Top 10 Tokens
 242252    safe, safe, safely, Safe, Safe, SAFE, SAFE, safety, safer, <bos>
 104785    çük, SLOW, slow, Slow, slow, Slow, maksi, lacable, jät, tempo
 243496    safe, safe, SAFE, ArgumentParser, Safe, Safe, <bos>, Confira, memoized, Ainda
  73159    soeur, slow, slowest, calm, Slow, slow, SLOW, calmer, hairc, atguigu
 230490    safe, safety, safe, Safe, Safe, Safety, Safety, safety, safely, SAFETY
 234025    slow, slowly, slow, <bos>, <Ac1403>, <Ac1327>, Slow, Slow, <Ac1340>, <Ac1450>
                                (c) Slow intervention for Slow/Fast Transport.

 Vector    Top 10 Tokens
 239787    risk, risk, <bos>, Risk, Risk, RISK, risks, Risks, RISK, riesgo
 240184    fast, fast, FAST, Fast, Fast, FAST, quickly, tolerably, hentai, Quickly
 259344    risk, risk, Risk, Risk, risks, Risks, riesgo, RISK, RISK, risky
 262123    fast, fast, Fast, Fast, faster, FAST, fastest, quick, quicker, FAST
 271027    fast, fast, fastest, faster, Fast, Fast, FAST, Faster, faster, FAST
 273133    fast, fast, Fast, Fast, FAST, FAST, <Ac1446>, faster, <Ac0390>, veloce
                                (d) Fast intervention for Slow/Fast Transport.
Table 2: Value vectors and their top-10 highest probability output tokens for steering interventions
in Low/High Transport and Slow/Fast Transport.




                                                       19
C.4   Steering Intervention Trajectories




               (a) Low Intervention                              (b) High Intervention
Figure 12: Low/High Transport: End-effector height from 10 trajectories with low intervention (a)
vs. high intervention (b). We plot the segment of the trajectory from when the robot picks up the
penguin to when it releases it into the basket. Low interventions have a lower maximum height on
average.




          (a) End-effector Displacement                 (b) Cumulative End-effector Displacement
Figure 13: Slow/Fast Transport: End-effector displacement (a) and cumulative end-effector dis-
placement (b) over a single trajectory with slow intervention vs. high intervention. While it may be
hard to compare displacement at each action step, the cumulative displacement shows how the slow
intervention reduces displacement.




                                                20
